[DOC-12609]: Document the extension to vector syntax to support pre filtering: MB-62230 (#285)
couchbaselabs/docs-devex: modules/vector-search/pages/pre-filtering-vector-search.adoc

= Pre-filtering Vector Searches
:page-topic-type: guide
:page-ui-name: {ui-name}
:description: You can specify filters as part of a vector search statement which will restrict the documents searched during the query.

[abstract]
{description}

== About Pre-filtering

Using pre-filtering as part of your vector search offers two key advantages:

> [horizontal]
> Enhanced precision and relevance::
> allows searches to be narrowed down to results based on specific criteria (eg., organization, date/time ranges, geospatial locations.)
> 
> Performance optimization::
> by reducing the search space before executing the queries, you can improve query execution time and reduce computational overhead.

Reviewer: I'm not sure that we need to format it like this? The lines are long enough that I just find it pretty hard to read on my screen. 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/98356bfe-339a-4b84-9c85-88540e9371b9)
```suggestion

1. **Enhanced precision and relevance**: Narrow your search results based on specific criteria, such as organization, date/time ranges, or geospatial locations.

2. **Performance optimization**: Reduce the search space before executing queries to improve query execution time and reduce computational overhead.
```

* Your user account has the *Search Admin* or *Search Reader* role.

* You installed the Couchbase command-line tool (CLI).

* You have the hostname or IP address for the node in your database where you're running the Search Service.
For more information about where to find the IP address for your node, see xref:server:manage:manage-nodes/list-cluster-nodes.adoc[].

* You have created a Vector Search index.
+
For more information about how to create a Vector Search index, see xref:create-vector-search-index-ui.adoc[] or xref:create-vector-search-index-rest-api.adoc[].
+
[TIP]
--
include::partial$download-sample-partial.adoc[]

For the best results, consider using the sample Vector Search index from xref:create-vector-search-index-ui.adoc#example[Create a Vector Search Index with the {page-ui-name}] or xref:create-vector-search-index-rest-api.adoc#example[Create a Vector Search Index with the REST API and curl/HTTP].
--

== Procedure

To run a pre-filtered vector search with the REST API:

. In your command-line tool, enter a `curl` command with the `XPOST` verb.
. Set your header content to include `"Content-Type: application/json"`.

> . Enter your username, password, and the Search Service endpoint on port `8094` with the name of the Vector Search index you want to query:

Reviewer: Why did we leave this as ending on a colon with no sample? I try to have a template example (with placeholders clearly marked) before going into a specific example that works with the vector-sample. 

Can we try and do that here?

Author: Can do 👍🏾

=== Example

In the following example, you will extend a search query to employ a pre-filter to narrow the set of documents that the query will search over.

[source, console]
----
include::example$run-pre-filtered-vector-search-rest-api.sh[]

> ----

Reviewer: Can we add in a brief explanation of what the actual filter is that's applied in this example? I'm assuming searching for "navy" in the "color" field, but

Author: Right, I think I've got it.

* You installed the Couchbase command-line tool (CLI).

* You have the hostname or IP address for the node in your database where you're running the Search Service.
For more information about where to find the IP address for your node, see xref:server:manage:manage-nodes/list-cluster-nodes.adoc[].

* You have created a Vector Search index.
+
For more information about how to create a Vector Search index, see xref:create-vector-search-index-ui.adoc[] or xref:create-vector-search-index-rest-api.adoc[].
+
[TIP]
--
include::partial$download-sample-partial.adoc[]

For the best results, consider using the sample Vector Search index from xref:create-vector-search-index-ui.adoc#example[Create a Vector Search Index with the {page-ui-name}] or xref:create-vector-search-index-rest-api.adoc#example[Create a Vector Search Index with the REST API and curl/HTTP].
--

== Procedure

To run a pre-filtered vector search with the REST API:

. In your command-line tool, enter a `curl` command with the `XPOST` verb.
. Set your header content to include `"Content-Type: application/json"`.
. Add your `username`, `password`, and the Search Service endpoint on port `8094`.

> . Add the `index name` you wish to query to the endpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the `index name` you want to query to the endpoint.
```

[source, console]
----
curl -XPOST -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -u ${CB_USERNAME}:${CB_PASSWORD} http://${CB_HOSTNAME}:8094/api/bucket/vector-sample/scope/color/index/{INDEX_NAME}/query \
-d \
----

=== Example

In the following example, you will extend a search query
to find matches in `color-index`.

> A pre-filter on the index will narrow the index entries searched over to those closely matching navy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A pre-filter on the query will narrow the documents in the index searched to those with a `color` field value that closely matches `navy`.
```

Feel free to correct me if I've misunderstood, but I imagine that's what the functionality is doing, based on the code added.

Author: Yep, that's a lot tighter, I think.
